Isabelle/MMT
============

## Requirements

Isabelle/MMT requires a version of Isabelle that fits precisely to
it. The latest stable release is for Isabelle2020 (April 2020). For
intermediate development versions see file `README_REPOSITORY` section
**Quick start in 30min** in https://isabelle.sketis.net/repos/isabelle

The following versions should fit together:

  * Isabelle/abf3e80bd815 from https://isabelle.sketis.net/repos/isabelle
  * AFP/9449ae539c8a from https://isabelle.sketis.net/repos/afp-devel
  * MMT/42718dc13dcc from https://github.com/UniFormal/MMT/commits/devel
  * MathHub/MMT/urtheories/5c80b26b6cae from
    https://gl.mathhub.info/MMT/urtheories/commits/devel

The corresponding OMDoc content is available here (commit messages refer to the
underlying versions of Isabelle + AFP):

  * https://gl.mathhub.info/Isabelle/Distribution
  * https://gl.mathhub.info/Isabelle/AFP


## Setup

Isabelle/MMT is a command-line tool within the Isabelle system environment.
Both building and running it requires proper Isabelle component setup, which
results in certain environment variables in the enclosing process. For
general explanations, see the Isabelle **system** manual (chapter 1), e.g.
available in the *Documentation* panel of Isabelle/jEdit. The MMT
sub-directory `src/mmt-isabelle` already provides suitable component
settings that can be activated e.g. in `$ISABELLE_HOME_USER/etc/settings`
like this:

    init_component ".../MMT/src/mmt-isabelle"

where `.../MMT` refers to the full path specification of the MMT source
directory. Note that a standalone `mmt.jar` is not sufficient: the Isabelle
component requires some regular files from the MMT source tree.


## Examples

Here are some example invocations of the main command-line tools:

* build (requires `sbt`):

      isabelle mmt_build

* importer:

      isabelle mmt_import -B ZF
      isabelle mmt_import HOL
      isabelle mmt_import -b HOL -g main

* HTTP server to browse the results:

      isabelle mmt_server -A isabelle_test

* MMT shell:

      isabelle mmt

* development with IntelliJ IDEA:

      isabelle env idea

  Note that ```build.sbt``` has some tricks on conditional project
  composition: it requires to re-initialize the IDEA project after dropping
  in or out of the Isabelle system environment.


## Big examples

Recall that Isabelle consists of two processes:

  1. ML: `poly` for the Poly/ML runtime system
  2. Scala: `java` for the Java Runtime Environment

Big examples require generous heap space. Note that both platforms have a
discontinuity when switching from short 32-bit pointers to full 64-bit ones:
*16 GB* for Poly/ML and *32 GB* for Java. Going beyond that doubles the
baseline memory requirements.

For ML it helps to use a base image, e.g. HOL-Analysis. For Java the default
settings need to be changed like this in `$ISABELLE_HOME_USER/etc/settings`:

      ISABELLE_TOOL_JAVA_OPTIONS="-Djava.awt.headless=true -Xss16m -Xms4g -Xmx30g"

Examples:

      isabelle mmt_import -b HOL-Analysis -a
      isabelle mmt_import -b HOL-Analysis -a -d '$AFP' -X slow
      isabelle mmt_import -b HOL-Analysis -a -d '$AFP' -X very_slow

Here `$AFP` refers to the Isabelle settings variable provided by the Archive
of Formal Proofs as Isabelle component (using a suitable `init_component`
line in `$ISABELLE_HOME_USER/etc/settings`). Alternatively, it is possible
to refer to the physical AFP directory as `.../AFP/thys` (the sub-directory
`thys` is important here).


## Directory layout for MathHub

The MMT MathHub keeps the main Isabelle Distribution separate from the
Archive of Formal Proofs. The `isabelle mmt_import` tool can use the chapter
structure of Isabelle sessions to distribute documents into different
archives. Its option `-C` provides (multiple) mappings from chapter names to
archive names (according to the base directory name). The chapter name `_`
serves as catch-all pattern.

Since all sessions in AFP are guaranteed to belong to the chapter `AFP`, the
following works for Isabelle + AFP as one big import process:

      isabelle mmt_import -b HOL-Analysis -a -d '$AFP' -X very_slow -A content/MathHub -C AFP=AFP -C _=Distribution

Note that other Isabelle applications may have their own chapter naming
scheme, or re-use official Isabelle chapter names; if nothing is specified,
the default chapter is `Unsorted`.


Command-line reference
======================

The entry points for Isabelle/MMT tools reside in the MMT directory
`src/mmt-isabelle/lib/Tools` -- usually some shell scripts that invoke Java
within the Isabelle environment, to pass the control over to some Scala
`main()` functions. The actual implementation is provided by regular Scala
functions, without assuming a command-line context.

The usage of command-line tools generally follows GNU bash standards: the
Isabelle/Scala library provides an imitation of GNU `getopts` for that.
Output and error behavior follows established standards for Isabelle
command-line tools. In particular, internal Java exception traces are *not*
shown to end-users by default.


## isabelle mmt_build

This is a thin wrapper for `sbt mmt/deploy` within the formal Isabelle
environment and the correct directory in the MMT source tree; it trims the
resulting jar to avoid duplicates of Scala libraries. Furthermore, it
ensures that Isabelle/Scala has been properly bootstrapped beforehand (e.g.
when working from the Isabelle repository).


## isabelle mmt_import

This is the main Isabelle/MMT importer: it explores Isabelle sessions and
loads all resulting theories into an Isabelle/PIDE process. Results are
continuously imported into MMT and written to specified math archive
directories. Its command-line usage is as follows:

    Usage: isabelle mmt_import [OPTIONS] [SESSIONS ...]

      Options are:
        -A DIR       add archive directory
        -C CH=AR     add mapping of chapter CH to archive AR, or default "_=AR"
        -B NAME      include session NAME and all descendants
        -D DIR       include session directory and select its sessions
        -R           operate on requirements of selected sessions
        -X NAME      exclude sessions from group NAME and all descendants
        -a           select all sessions
        -b NAME      base logic image (default "Pure")
        -d DIR       include session directory
        -g NAME      select session group NAME
        -o OPTION    override Isabelle system OPTION (via NAME=VAL or NAME)
        -v           verbose mode
        -x NAME      exclude session NAME and all descendants

      Import specified sessions into MMT archive directories.

Options `-A` and `-C` specify target archives and a mapping from Isabelle
session chapters to MMT archives. Chapter names are provided in Isabelle
session `ROOT` specifications, and archive names are the base directory
names: if it is the same as the chapter name, the directory will be used at
its root; otherwise the chapter becomes a sub-directory of the archive. The
directories given via (multiple) `-A` options are recursively searched for
MMT archives. If the result is empty, a fresh archive is initialized
according to Isabelle system options `mmt_archive_dir` etc. Thus it is
possible to use `isabelle mmt` without any archive options and get results
into a default directory (`isabelle_test`), freshly initialized on demand.

Options `-B`, `-D`, `-R`, `-X`, `-a`, `-d`, `-g`, `-x` with remaining
non-option arguments provide the standard Isabelle vocabulary to specify
sessions, e.g. see `isabelle build` described in the **system** manual (with
examples).

Option `-o` allows to augment the environment of Isabelle system options,
before invoking the main import process; see again the **system** manual. A
typical example is `-o threads=8` to specify the number of ML threads, or
`-o skip_proofs` to skip actual proof checking. Note that Isabelle/MMT also
provides its own options in `src/mmt-isabelle/etc/options` (with short
descriptions).

Option `-b` specifies an optional base logic image, for improved scalability
of the PIDE session. Its theories are only processed if it is included in the
overall session selection.

Option `-v` enables verbose mode, similar to `isabelle build`.


## isabelle mmt_server

This is a thin wrapper for the regular MMT web server. It refers to archives
in a similar manner as `isabelle mmt_import`; thus it is useful to explore
the results of that tool. The command-line usage is as follows:

    Usage: isabelle mmt_server [OPTIONS]

      Options are:
        -A DIR       add archive directory
        -p PORT      server port (default: 8080)

      Start MMT HTTP server on localhost, using specified archive directories.

Option `-A` refers to archive directories that are recursively explored as
in `isabelle mmt_build`. In order to refer to the default archive of that
tool (option `-I` above), it needs to be included explicitly as `-A` here:
e.g. `isabelle mmt_server -A isabelle_test`.

Option `-p` specifies an alternative HTTP server port.


## isabelle mmt

This is a thin wrapper to the standard MMT shell, running within the
Isabelle system environment, with both the `mmt.jar` and the Isabelle/Scala
jars in the Java name space. In particular, dropping into its `scala`
toplevel allows to explore Isabelle and MMT functionality interactively on
the Scala toplevel.

The command-line usage is the same as for the regular MMT shell.